---
type: meeting
meeting type: backyard-daily
created: 2025-08-25
scheduled: 2025-08-25T11:45:00
related:
previous:
agenda:
participants:
  - "[[Team Phoenix]]"
tags:
  - meet
  - meet/backyard-daily
---
From: [[BY image building process]]
___
## who?

`=this.participants`

## why?
> what caused this to happen, why do we need to have this meeting?

## what?
> meeting agenda

`=this.agenda`

## discussion ðŸ—¨

- [x] [[Transac Zones update ticket]] status: asked [[Alan Jaouen]] to trigger the update one more time -> Vincent can test
- [x] [[BY image building process]]
- [x] GA tracking on BY - we can implement it new

- [x] [[Organization of Visits - Oov|Oov]]: asked about the current status on channel
