---
type: meeting
meeting type: backyard-daily
created: 2025-08-14
scheduled: 2025-08-14T11:00:00
related:
previous:
agenda: normal daily
participants: []
tags:
  - meet
---
From: [[git custom aliases]]
___
## who?

`=this.participants`

## why?
> what caused this to happen, why do we need to have this meeting?

## notes ðŸ—’

1. working on the [[Organization of Visits - Oov|Oov]] diagram
2. checking existing implementation of [[Evaluation]]s on BY
3. communicating with [[Team Pulsar]]
4. working on [[Transac Zones update ticket]]
5. would like to **review** current status on Laravel migration ; **PR** review, next steps


### questions for Pulsar

1. [x] do we have a mapping between the visit status and evaluation status on BY?
2. [ ] ..
