---
source: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Candy_Candy
published: 2005-02-04
created: 2025-09-21
related:
  - "[[Candy Candy (1976)]]"
tags:
  - anime
  - djetinjstvo
---
- [Article](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Candy_Candy)
- [Talk](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Candy_Candy)

> ***Candy Candy*** (キャンディ・キャンディ, *Kyandi Kyandi*) is a Japanese series created by Japanese writer Keiko Nagita under the pen name [Kyoko Mizuki](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kyoko_Mizuki "Kyoko Mizuki").[^1] [^2] The main character, Candice "Candy" White Ardley, is a blonde girl with freckles, large emerald green eyes and long hair, worn in pigtails with bows. *Candy Candy* first appeared as a manga in April 1975, written by Mizuki and illustrated by manga artist [Yumiko Igarashi](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yumiko_Igarashi "Yumiko Igarashi"), a collaboration which was put together by the Japanese magazine *[Nakayoshi](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nakayoshi "Nakayoshi")* who were interested in recreating a "masterpiece" manga in the same vein as *[Heidi](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heidi "Heidi")*, *[Anne of Green Gables](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anne_of_Green_Gables "Anne of Green Gables")* and other famous classic titles of literature read predominantly by young girls. The manga series ran for four years,[^1] and won the 1st [Kodansha Manga Award](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kodansha_Manga_Award "Kodansha Manga Award") for [shōjo](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sh%C5%8Djo_manga "Shōjo manga") in 1977.[^3] The story was adapted into an anime series by [Toei Animation](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toei_Animation "Toei Animation").[^1] There are also three animated [short films](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Short_films "Short films").

The *Candy Candy* manga provides a story for the shōjo demographic of young girls in early adolescence. Candy is an abandoned orphan taken in by Pony's Home, an orphanage near [Lake Michigan](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lake_Michigan "Lake Michigan") around the start of the 20th century.[^4] She spends the first years of her life at the orphanage, to where she would often return to repose and to decide the next course in her life. When Candy was 6 years old, Annie, her best friend at the orphanage, is adopted. Without her friend, Candy runs to Pony's Hill while crying. There she briefly meets a mysterious boy dressed in a Scottish kilt and carrying a bagpipe, who tells her she is more beautiful when she laughs. Candy retains fond memories of that boy. She remembers him as the "Prince on the Hill". After he disappears, Candy finds a badge left behind by the "Prince"; this becomes her happiness talisman later in life.

When she turns 12, Candy is taken in by the Leagan family as a companion for their daughter Eliza. The Leagans treat her poorly and eventually make Candy a servant girl. While there, Candy also meets three boys: Anthony Brown, who looks exactly like the "Prince on the Hill", and the Cornwell brothers, the inventive Alistair and the flamboyant Archibald (Stair and Archie). They all become smitten with Candy and become friends. Candy has special feelings for Anthony, and he is her "first, innocent love". This does not go unnoticed by Eliza, who is also interested in Anthony, and she wants desperately to send Candy away. Both her and her brother Neil bully Candy at every opportunity. On one such an occasion, the two siblings plot against Candy, and she ends up being accused of stealing, causing her to run away. She wants to return to Pony's Home, but falls asleep inside a small boat and is in danger of falling off a waterfall. A mysterious bearded man who lives in a hut with animals saves her, introducing himself as Albert. Candy feels how kind this man is and he leaves a deep impression on her. Candy returns to the Leagans, and as a punishment for "stealing", she is sent away to work on their family farm in Mexico. Through the efforts of her friends, who write a letter to their rich Great Uncle William Ardlay, the head of the Ardlay clan, Candy is rescued when Great Uncle William allegedly adopts her. His true identity remains a mystery until the end of the story and the adoption is never confirmed but continuously disputed, especially amongst the members of the Ardlay family.

During Candy's pseudo-adoption party, Anthony dies in a hunting accident when he was thrown off his horse. Candy is completely distraught and decides she wants to return to Pony's Home. Georges, the personal assistant to Great Uncle William, appears one day and asks Candy to come with him. Great Uncle William will be sending her, along with Archie, Stair and the Leagan siblings, to [London](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/London "London") to study at the prestigious St. Paul's College. It is here she meets and becomes attracted to Terrence (Terrius/Terry) Granchester, the illegitimate child of a British Duke and an American Broadway actress, Eleanor Baker. Candy sees him for the first time, crying, on New Year's Eve while both are aboard the boat to London. Terry is Candy's "second and passionate love that has to be broken".[^5] Circumstances divide the pair when Eliza Leagan schemes to have Candy expelled from St. Paul's by manipulating them into a scandal.

After the scandal, Terry leaves St. Paul's to protect Candy's reputation and pursue his aspiration to become a theatre actor. When Candy finds out, she also decides to leave the school in order to find her own path in life. She is hopeful she will meet Terry and Albert again as all characters embark on their individual life journeys in the United States. Candy is training to become a nurse in Chicago around the time of [World War I](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I "World War I"),[^4] and Terry is pursuing a career as a rising star actor in New York. Meanwhile, they find each other again and hope to resume their relationship, albeit only a long-distance one through letters. At the same time, an actress and colleague in his theatre troupe, Susanna, is attracted to Terry. She confesses her love to him one evening at the theatre, but Terry never tells her about Candy even though he had numerous opportunities to do so. Instead, Terry confesses to himself that he is also attracted to Susanna. Furthermore, rumors had been surfacing that Terry and Susanna were intimately involved as they were spending much time together during their rehearsals as "Romeo and Juliet". During a rehearsal, a stage light comes loose and before it falls on Terry, Susanna pushes him aside, but in the process she gets injured and eventually loses her leg. Susanna's mother blackmails Terry to marry Susanna, as he is the reason that her daughter's career is over. In the meantime, Susanna descends into depression and she attempts to commit suicide, feeling that as long as she is alive she will be a burden for both Candy and Terry. Candy winds up saving her from falling from the hospital roof, but Terry, feeling responsible, is torn between his love for Candy and his duty to stay by Susanna's side. Candy, upon seeing the desperate turmoil on Terry's face, decides to sacrifice her own happiness, and leaves Terry behind with Susanna. She returns to Chicago to continue her life. Terry, on the other hand, does not stop Candy from leaving but returns to Susanna, whom he is also attracted to. Besides, Terry had already decided to stay with Susanna and Candy eventually came to realize his intentions.

Before Candy and Terry broke up, Candy had become the nurse and caretaker of Albert, who by chance was brought to Chicago hospital suffering amnesia after a WWI bomb explosion on a train in Italy. After a while as a hospital patient, Candy decides to take Albert into her apartment in Magnolia House, to care for him and help him regain his memory. Albert is the one who comforts Candy when she returns severely depressed after her break up with Terry. Albert ultimately regains his memory, and briefly disappears, leading Candy once more to a broken Terry, who is acting at a travelling theatre stage in Rockstown. She returns home when she sees Terry regaining his old spark, supposedly having seen her in the audience. Candy continues her quest to try to find Albert but to no avail. Once back at Pony's Home, Neal Leagan, who has become infatuated with her, tries to force Candy to accept an engagement. Albert reappears and finally reveals his true identity to Candy; he is the "Great Uncle William". He stops the engagement with Neil, and at the end of the manga, Albert also reveals to Candy that he was the seventeen year old boy at the Hill that day she was crying; hence, her "Prince on the Hill". Candy runs with tears into his open arms.

Anime adaptation of the manga was produced by [Toei Animation](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toei_Animation "Toei Animation"), who bought the rights for the story from the manga publishers. There are some plot and character differences between the manga and the anime: Candy's age was different for several events when she grew up at Pony's Home. In the manga, she was six or seven years old when she met her Prince of the Hill, but was ten in the anime. Her sidekick pet [raccoon](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raccoon "Raccoon") Kurin/Clint belonged solely to the anime version. The anime achieved worldwide success. Keiko Nagita had no involvement with the Japanese anime apart from writing the lyrics to the opening and closing credits songs.

In Italy, the anime's ending was changed, albeit without the involvement of Keiko Nagita or Toei Animation. In the Italian version, Candy and Terry meet again at a train station, deciding to stay together. This ending is strictly only shown in the Italian version of the anime and nowhere else, but the animation sequences were from previous episodes.

The story of *Candy Candy* was also published several times in the form of novels. Each time, the text and the look of the book was slightly changed. The first and second editions of the book contained drawings from Igarashi, while the editions released after 2000 did not contain drawings due to problems between the two creators.

In 2010, the novel *Candy Candy: The Final Story* was re-written one last time by Keiko Nagita (the real name of Kyoko Mizuki). In this significantly revised novel edition, Suzanna dies and Candy finds out while reading her obituary in a newspaper. During his stage career, Terry is known as Terence Graham. He no longer is using his father's surname "Granchester" as he had renounced it upon his departure from the UK several years ago. The novel ends with Candy in her mid-30s living near Avon river in England, with the man she loves the most as World War II is approaching. The identity of this man is never revealed in the text. Keiko Nagita leaves it up to the readers' interpretation to decide who that man is as he could be a character mentioned or not mentioned in the novel. In addition, there is no indication whether Candy is married or not, whether she has continued her career, or if she has children of her own. All the readers know is that she is happy to be with the man she loves and most importantly, she has eventually found peace with her own self putting behind her traumatic past.

[Kyoko Mizuki](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kyoko_Mizuki "Kyoko Mizuki") 's *Candy Candy* novel, consisting of three volumes, has piqued the interest of *Candy Candy* fans outside Japan for some years. This novel was only available in Japan and published in Japanese. The third volume covers the period after the events chronicled in the [manga](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manga "Manga") and [anime](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anime "Anime").[^6] The novels have been translated in their entirety by [Western](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Western_world "Western world") fans but the translations confirmed that, true to her artistic form, Kyoko Mizuki did not provide concrete closure to the story, yet in the last letter that closed out the novel, Candy was still an optimistic, life-loving and cheerful heroine.

In 2010, Mizuki rewrote from the start and published the " *Candy Candy Final Story* " (*CCFS*), which was published in two volumes and not three volumes as the earlier novels. She announced that this was her final effort to tell the story as she always intended from the beginning, without the influence of the manga illustrator or the manga production team. In broad lines most of the plot of the story remains the same as with the previous novel editions, with many minor details having been changed. A significant change is Susanna's death as well as a brief and cryptic note signed with the initials "T.G.", which comes right after the death of the actress in the book. A further noteworthily intriguing change is that the story continues with the "Epilogue" centering on the intricate and nuanced relationship between Candy and Albert. The style of the writing seems to be more mature and sophisticated. Keiko Nagita herself has said this novel edition is for Candy's fans who are now adults. Furthermore, she specifies that she wants her readers to imagine the characters' appearances based on the manga illustrations of Yumiko Igarashi as there are almost no such descriptions found in her own novel.

The final section of the novel or "Epilogue" is where a series of letters are exchanged between Candy and Albert. They describe the aftermath from the revelations about Albert being the "Great Uncle William" and the "Prince of the Hill". Albert's past is also explored, as a young boy in the Ardlay clan and how he became the mysterious Great Uncle William. Through their correspondence, Candy and Albert express their inner emotions as well as yearning for the days they had been living together at the "Magnolia House". This exchange of letters ends with Candy expressing her intention to return her diary to Albert and see him again. Subsequently, Candy includes a recollection of her (unsent) letter to Anthony where she reflects upon her life thus far. Keiko Nagita also added a final scene where Candy, in her thirties and living near Avon river, greets her beloved as he enters their home. The man's name is never revealed, but Nagita said that she was satisfied knowing that Candy now lived a happy life with that mystery man. Keiko Nagita also made it clear that the identity of "anohito" means nothing to her as her focus is on the psychophysical development of Candy as well as her eventual emotional maturity and perseverance.

In regard to further translations of Nagita's novel, there are three official translations. In 2015, the Italian publisher Kappalab obtained the copyright to publish *CCFS* in its entirety in Italian.[^7] The first volume was published in early 2015, while the second volume was released that summer. The second official translation was in French via Pika Roman Editions in 2019, again in two volumes. Thirdly, the book was published in Spanish under Arechi Manga shortly after in late 2019 but in a single volume.

Announcement of the *Candy Candy* manga appeared in the March 1975 issue of *[Nakayoshi](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nakayoshi "Nakayoshi")*. The first chapter was published in the following month, and continued until the last chapter in March 1979. The story, however, did not appear in the November 1975, December 1976, January 1978 and June 1978 issues. The manga was published in nine volumes.

- 1 (2 October 1975) [^8]
- 2 (8 March 1976) [^9]
- 3 (8 August 1976) [^10]
- 4 (8 December 1976) [^11]
- 5 (18 March 1977) [^12]
- 6 (18 September 1977) [^13]
- 7 (18 April 1978) [^14]
- 8 (18 November 1978) [^15]
- 9 (19 March 1979) [^16]

An [anime](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anime "Anime") series adaptation was produced for NET (now known as [TV Asahi](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/TV_Asahi "TV Asahi")) that was originally aired on Fridays from October 1, 1976 to February 2, 1979. The anime has 115 episodes which run for 25 minutes each, and it had a wide popularity in Europe, Asia and Latin America.

There are three animated [short films](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Short_film "Short film"): *Candy Candy: The Call of Spring/The May Festival* (1978),[^17] *Candy Candy's Summer Vacation* (1978) [^18] and *Candy Candy the Movie* (1992).[^19]

- [Minori Matsushima](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minori_Matsushima "Minori Matsushima") as Candice "Candy" White Ardlay
- [Makio Inoue](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Makio_Inoue "Makio Inoue") as William Albert Ardlay
- [Kei Tomiyama](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kei_Tomiyama "Kei Tomiyama") as Terrence "Terrius/Terry" Graham Granchester
- [Kazuhiko Inoue](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kazuhiko_Inoue "Kazuhiko Inoue") as Anthony Brown
- [Ryo Horikawa](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ryo_Horikawa "Ryo Horikawa") as Anthony Brown (1992 film)
- [Kaneta Kimotsuki](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaneta_Kimotsuki "Kaneta Kimotsuki") as Alistair "Stear" Cornwell
- [Yūji Mitsuya](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Y%C5%ABji_Mitsuya "Yūji Mitsuya") as Archibald "Archie" Cornwell
- [Mami Koyama](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mami_Koyama "Mami Koyama") as Annie Brighton
- [Yumi Touma](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yumi_Touma "Yumi Touma") as Annie Brighton (1992 film)
- [Chiyoko Kawashima](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chiyoko_Kawashima "Chiyoko Kawashima") as Patricia "Patty" O'Brien
- Yumi Nakatani as Eliza Leagan
- [Eiko Hisamura](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eiko_Hisamura "Eiko Hisamura") as Eliza Leagan (1992 film)
- Kiyoshi Komiyama as Neil Leagan
- [Ryuusei Nakao](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ryuusei_Nakao "Ryuusei Nakao") as Neil Leagan (1992 film)
- [Taeko Nakanishi](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taeko_Nakanishi "Taeko Nakanishi") as Sister Pony, Grandaunt Elory and Narrator
- [Nana Yamaguchi](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nana_Yamaguchi "Nana Yamaguchi") as Sister Lane, Mrs. Leagan and Sister Gray
- [Miyoko Aso](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miyoko_Aso "Miyoko Aso") as Mary Jane Headmistress
- [Sachiko Chijimatsu](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sachiko_Chijimatsu "Sachiko Chijimatsu") as Jimmy
- [Eken Mine](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eken_Mine "Eken Mine") as Garcia
- Koko Kagawa as Susanna Marlowe

In 1981, a Korean drama/family live action film based on the series was produced by Chu-ji Choi, directed by In-hyeon Choi, and written by Man Izawa. Shin-hie Choi starred, alongside Do-hie Kim, Hyo-jeong Eom, Bo-geun Song and Eun-suk Yu. Due to licensing issues, the film was only released domestically.[^20]

An Indonesian production house Sinemart made modern adaptation titled *Candy*. It was produced by Leo Sutanto and directed by Widi Wijaya, and aired on channel RCTI in 2007, starring Rachel Amanda, Nimaz Dewantary, Lucky Perdana, and Bobby Joseph.[^21] [^22]

During the 1980s to early 1990s, VHS within Japan and the rest of the world were being serialized and distributed under the approval of [Toei Animation](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toei_Animation "Toei Animation"). These international VHS releases were released in places like France, Italy, Britain, the USA, Mexico, Sweden and Finland. Other international VHS releases other than these countries are unknown. From 1985 to 1989, Toei released 8 official VHS volumes containing 24 episodes and a VHS with the additional two OVAs, *The Call of Spring* and *Candy Candy no Natsuyasumi* under the label name Toei Video. These VHS included 30-second previews as well as advertisements for other related anime. In 1992, a special film of *Candy Candy* was released in theaters along with the *[Goldfish Warning!](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goldfish_Warning! "Goldfish Warning!")* film before the showing of [Disney](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walt_Disney_Studios_\(division\) "Walt Disney Studios (division)") 's *[Cinderella](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cinderella_\(1950_film\) "Cinderella (1950 film)")* which was being reshown in theaters. This release had two home releases, a VHS tape and a Laserdisc.

| Name | Episodes | Release date | Extras | Catalog |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CANDY CANDY Vol. 1 | 1, 5, 12 | Unknown | Previews of 2, 3 and 4 + Call of Spring advertisement | TE-M884 |
| CANDY CANDY Vol. 2 | 22, 23, 24 | 昭和62年10月9日 | Previews of 25, 26, 27 (27 is not on the third vol. VHS) | TE-M262 |
| CANDY CANDY Vol. 3 | 25, 26, 29 | 昭和63年05月13日 | Unknown | VRTM-00643 |
| CANDY CANDY Vol. 4 | 30, 31, 32 | 昭和63年10月14日 | Unknown | VRTM-00106 |
| CANDY CANDY Vol. 5 | 36, 37, 38 | 昭和64年2月10日 | Unknown | VRTM-00818 |
| CANDY CANDY Vol. 6 | 39, 40, 41 | 昭和64年05月12日 | Unknown | VRTM-00800 |
| CANDY CANDY Vol. 7 | 42, 43, 44 | 昭和64年09月08日 | Unknown | VRTM-00311 |
| CANDY CANDY Vol. 8 | 45, 46, 47 | 昭和64年11月10日 | Unknown | VRTM-00707 |
| CANDY CANDY Original Movie - Call of Spring (OVA 1) - Candy Candy no Natsuyasumi (OVA 2) | OVA 1, OVA 2 | Unknown | Toei Otoshidama Manga Matsuri | TE-M156 |
| MILLION SELLER SERIES CANDY CANDY - A Small Ribbon Connecting Hearts | 11 | Unknown | Unknown | TE-M437 |
| CANDY CANDY New Movie | OVA 3 | 平成4年12月11日 | Karaoke of the opening theme | - VHS VRTM-01308 - LD LSTD-01050 |

Between 1998 and 2001, three lawsuits were settled between [Kyoko Mizuki](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kyoko_Mizuki "Kyoko Mizuki"), [Yumiko Igarashi](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yumiko_Igarashi "Yumiko Igarashi") and Toei Animation over the ownership of the *Candy Candy* copyrights.[^1] These lawsuits made Toei halt the broadcast of the *Candy Candy* anime. In the 2000s, *Candy Candy* episodes began to be sold on bootleg [DVD](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/DVD "DVD") format, as the legal lawsuits between the authors halted any production of licensed goods.[^1] In 2005 and 2006, illegal/unlicensed *Candy* box sets began to appear. The first was from France, which included the French and Japanese dialogue. Two Korean box sets are now out of stock, and they include the Japanese and Korean dialogue, and Korean subtitles. 20 discs altogether are divided into two box sets and available from HanBooks and Sensasian. Prior to the release, illegal/unlicensed Spanish DVD sets with poor audio and video were widely available on eBay. The illegal/unlicensed DVD set is issued in both Mandarin and Japanese with Chinese, English and Korean subtitles. On January 8, 2007, [Chilean](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chile "Chile") newspaper *[Las Últimas Noticias](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Las_%C3%9Altimas_Noticias "Las Últimas Noticias")* began issuing illegal/unlicensed DVDs of *Candy Candy* with its issues every Monday, with plans to continue to do so until all 115 episodes were released. In 2008, an illegal/unlicensed 115-episode DVD set was released in Taiwan.

In 1980, [ZIV International](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/ZIV_International "ZIV International") acquired the U.S. rights to the series. The first two episodes were dubbed into English, with a new theme song and score created by in-house composer [Mark Mercury](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Mercury "Mark Mercury"). This was ultimately condensed into a straight-to-video production, released on tape in 1981 by [Media Home Entertainment](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Media_Home_Entertainment "Media Home Entertainment") and then by Family Home Entertainment. It is unknown if any more episodes were dubbed for the American market. None of these have been subsequently reissued.

In the early 1990s, co-creators Mizuki and Igarashi, along with Toei Animation, battled over the legal ownership of the title. Igarashi was producing *Candy Candy* material without the consent of Mizuki or Toei. In 1998, Mizuki brought her case to a Tokyo district court to prove that she had equal rights of ownership of the *Candy Candy* title. In October 2001, the court ruled the case in favor of Mizuki and ordered Igarashi and five companies that distributed the unauthorized merchandise to pay Mizuki ¥ 29,500,000, or 3% of their sales.[^23] In June 2002, Igarashi sued Toei to enforce her rights on the *Candy Candy* trademark, forcing broadcasters to stop airing the series.[^24]

In September 2003, a toy manufacturer based in [Misato, Saitama](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Misato,_Saitama_\(city\) "Misato, Saitama (city)") sued the two copyright managers of *Candy Candy* for ¥ 11 million for loss of revenue due to legal battle between Mizuki and Igarashi. The manufacturer was commissioned by the copyright managers to produce *Candy Candy* jigsaw puzzles without being informed that they could be immediately dismissed by Mizuki any time for copyright infringement. The Tokyo high court ordered the copyright managers to pay ¥ 7.8 million to the toy company.[^25]

In 2011, the series was parodied on a *[Saturday Night Live](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saturday_Night_Live "Saturday Night Live")* sketch, "J-Pop! America Fun Time Now!" [^26]

- [*Candy Candy*](https://www.animenewsnetwork.com/encyclopedia/manga.php?id=3929) (manga) at [Anime News Network](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anime_News_Network "Anime News Network") 's encyclopedia
- [*Candy Candy*](https://www.animenewsnetwork.com/encyclopedia/anime.php?id=545) (anime) at [Anime News Network](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anime_News_Network "Anime News Network") 's encyclopedia

[^1]: Mays, Jonathan. ["The Candy Candy Nightmare"](http://www.animenewsnetwork.com/feature/2003-09-13). Anime News Network. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20080528060409/http://www.animenewsnetwork.com/feature/2003-09-13) from the original on 28 May 2008. Retrieved 8 April 2007.

[^2]: ["Candy Candy vo"](http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/serie-vo/Candy-Candy-vo). *manga-news.com* (in French). [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20141209111317/http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/serie-vo/Candy-Candy-vo) from the original on 9 December 2014. Retrieved 16 November 2014.

[^3]: Hahn, Joel. ["Kodansha Manga Awards"](https://web.archive.org/web/20070816031310/http://www.hahnlibrary.net/comics/awards/kodansha.shtml). *Comic Book Awards Almanac*. Archived from [the original](http://www.hahnlibrary.net/comics/awards/kodansha.shtml) on 16 August 2007. Retrieved 21 August 2007.

[^4]: ["Candy Candy"](https://web.archive.org/web/20080824033611/http://www.tv.com/candy-candy/show/30404/summary.html). TV.com. Archived from [the original](http://www.tv.com/candy-candy/show/30404/summary.html) on 24 August 2008. Retrieved 8 April 2007.

[^5]: ["Srv7.biz 無料サーバーはサービスを終了しました"](http://lakewood.srv7.biz/). [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20221222181735/http://lakewood.srv7.biz/) from the original on 22 December 2022. Retrieved 25 October 2009.

[^6]: ["Candy Candy 2001"](https://web.archive.org/web/20090216054105/http://candycandy.fdns.net/english/novelas.htm). candycandy.fdns. Archived from [the original](http://www.candycandy.fdns.net/english/novelas.htm) on 16 February 2009. Retrieved 1 November 2011.

[^7]: ["Chi siamo - Kappalab s.r.l."](https://web.archive.org/web/20150618153343/http://www.kappalab.it/content/4-chi-siamo) *kappalab.it* (in Italian). 18 June 2015. Archived from [the original](http://www.kappalab.it/content/4-chi-siamo) on 18 June 2015. Retrieved 19 February 2021.

[^8]: ["Candy Candy jp Vol.1"](http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-1). *manga-news.com* (in French). [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20160303212544/http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-1) from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 16 November 2014.

[^9]: ["Candy Candy jp Vol.2"](http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-2). *manga-news.com* (in French). [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20160303224729/http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-2) from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 16 November 2014.

[^10]: ["Candy Candy jp Vol.3"](http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-3). *manga-news.com* (in French). [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20170630232706/http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-3) from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 16 November 2014.

[^11]: ["Candy Candy jp Vol.4"](http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-4). *manga-news.com* (in French). [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20160303212747/http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-4) from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 16 November 2014.

[^12]: ["Candy Candy jp Vol.5"](http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-5). *manga-news.com* (in French). [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20160303213923/http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-5) from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 16 November 2014.

[^13]: ["Candy Candy jp Vol.6"](http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-6). *manga-news.com* (in French). [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20160303203711/http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-6) from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 16 November 2014.

[^14]: ["Candy Candy jp Vol.7"](http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-7). *manga-news.com* (in French). [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20160304051435/http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-7) from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 16 November 2014.

[^15]: ["Candy Candy jp Vol.8"](http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-8). *manga-news.com* (in French). [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20160304054329/http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-8) from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 16 November 2014.

[^16]: ["Candy Candy jp Vol.9"](http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-9). *manga-news.com* (in French). [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20160303233400/http://www.manga-news.com/index.php/manga-vo/Candy-Candy-jp/vol-9) from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 16 November 2014.

[^17]: [キャンディ・キャンディ 春の呼び声 (1978)](https://www.allcinema.net/prog/show_c.php?num_c=146244). *allcinema* (in Japanese). Stingray. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20150618152837/http://www.allcinema.net/prog/show_c.php?num_c=146244) from the original on 18 June 2015. Retrieved 26 September 2014.

[^18]: [キャンディ・キャンディ キャンディ・キャンディの夏休み (1978)](https://www.allcinema.net/prog/show_c.php?num_c=146379). *allcinema* (in Japanese). Stingray. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20141217220705/http://www.allcinema.net/prog/show_c.php?num_c=146379) from the original on 17 December 2014. Retrieved 26 September 2014.

[^19]: [キャンディ・キャンディ (1992)](https://www.allcinema.net/prog/show_c.php?num_c=151663). *allcinema* (in Japanese). Stingray. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20150618154312/http://www.allcinema.net/prog/show_c.php?num_c=151663) from the original on 18 June 2015. Retrieved 26 September 2014.

[^20]: ["Candy Candy (1981) Korean live action movie adaptation"](http://www.kmdb.or.kr/movies/movie_detail.asp?nation=K&p_dataid=03531). kmdb.or.kr. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20200707113834/http://www.kmdb.or.kr/movies/movie_detail.asp?nation=K&p_dataid=03531) from the original on 7 July 2020. Retrieved 18 June 2015.

[^21]: ["Candy (2007) Indonesian live action drama adaptation"](http://www.sinemart.com/tv.php?id=100). sinemart.com. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20150629045227/http://www.sinemart.com/tv.php?id=100) from the original on 29 June 2015. Retrieved 18 June 2015.

[^22]: ["Program"](https://web.archive.org/web/20151105153553/https://www.mnccontents.com/program/detail/candy). *www.mnccontents.com*. Archived from [the original](https://www.mnccontents.com/program/detail/candy) on 5 November 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2022.

[^23]: Macdonald, Christopher (27 October 2001). ["Candy Candy Lawsuit Ends"](https://www.animenewsnetwork.com/news/2001-10-27/candy-candy-lawsuit-ends). *[Anime News Network](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anime_News_Network "Anime News Network")*. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20230320154212/https://www.animenewsnetwork.com/news/2001-10-27/candy-candy-lawsuit-ends) from the original on 20 March 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023.

[^24]: Macdonald, Christopher (3 June 2002). ["Candy Candy Legal Issues Continue"](https://www.animenewsnetwork.com/news/2002-06-03/candy-candy-legal-issues-continue). *[Anime News Network](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anime_News_Network "Anime News Network")*. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20230320154215/https://www.animenewsnetwork.com/news/2002-06-03/candy-candy-legal-issues-continue) from the original on 20 March 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023.

[^25]: Mays, Jonathan (13 September 2003). ["Candy Candy Lawsuits Continue"](https://www.animenewsnetwork.com/news/2003-09-13/candy-candy-lawsuits-continue). *[Anime News Network](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anime_News_Network "Anime News Network")*. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20230320154212/https://www.animenewsnetwork.com/news/2003-09-13/candy-candy-lawsuits-continue) from the original on 20 March 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023.

[^26]: ["J-Pop Talk Show"](http://www.nbc.com/saturday-night-live/video/j-pop-talk-show/n13243). 15 October 2011. [Archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20160430175557/http://www.nbc.com/saturday-night-live/video/j-pop-talk-show/n13243) from the original on 30 April 2016. Retrieved 8 May 2016.