---
type: meeting
meeting type: 1on1
created: 2025-10-15
scheduled: 2025-10-15T14:00:00
related:
previous:
agenda:
participants:
  - "[[Yoan]]"
  - "[[vladimir sedlar|me]]"
tags:
  - meet
---
From: [[2025-10-15-Wed]]
___
## who?

`=this.participants`

## why?
> what caused this to happen, why do we need to have this meeting?

## what?
> meeting agenda

`=this.agenda`

## notes ðŸ—’
- ..

## discussion ðŸ—¨


### tickets ðŸŽ«

- bucket: https://console.cloud.google.com/storage/browser/ma-qsl-sales-people-calls-records-dev;tab=objects?forceOnBucketsSortingFiltering=true&hl=en&inv=1&invt=Abp44A&project=ma-dev2&prefix=&forceOnObjectsSortingFiltering=false
- https://backyard.meilleursagents.com/my/calls?call_date=03%2F09%2F2025&user_id=1021810

- [ ] need to move files to bucket ðŸª£
- [ ] check with [[Ivan Vukusic]] permissions
- [ ] ..

- permissions need to be updated manually if it has to be public
- some other guy is involved
- [[Ivan Vukusic]]
- ..

### [[TIB-76]]
...

### [[TIB-61]]
https://avivgroup.atlassian.net/browse/TIB-61
