---
type: meeting
meeting type: 1on1
created: 2025-07-30
scheduled: 2025-07-30T14:00:00
related:
previous:
agenda:
participants:
  - "[[Yoan Haouzi]]"
  - "[[vladimir sedlar]]"
tags:
  - meet
  - meet/1on1/Yoan
---
From: [[Group relation on Project]]
___
## who?

`=this.participants`

## why?
> what caused this to happen, why do we need to have this meeting?

## what?
> meeting agenda

`=this.agenda`

## notes ğŸ—’


- [x] jenkins builds + hashes 
- [ ] transac ticket
- [ ] slack for [[Zvonimir Lokmer]] and [[Ivan Majstorovic]]
- [ ] ..