---
date: 2024-11-07
tags:
  - call
  - crm
  - work/call
  - work
  - deadline
  - meeting
  - meet
---
#call 
#crm 
#work/call
#luna

[[luna team]]

**In**: `= this.date - date(today)`
**at**: 2PM

## who
- [[luna team]]
- [[correntin]]
- [[alexis vassilopoulos]]

## what
More clarity on the time estimations the deadlines for the [[LUQA]] project

---

## <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">notes</mark>
- First time we see [[alexis vassilopoulos]] 
- the business expectations are really ambitious and probably won't be met [[alexis vassilopoulos]]
- [[alexis vassilopoulos]] is calm and collected
	- has a good approach to `decision making`
	- he's been here for 4 years
- [[alexis vassilopoulos]] already pushed the [[LUQA]] to June
- the [[LUQA]] will be an internal tool
- we can reach out to [[alexis vassilopoulos]] directly
> 	- alexis is always there
- we can reach out to [[Midgard team]] about some backend solutions
- $ these people are getting bonuses
- @ we can ask questions in public and start discussions
- ...

## ideas ðŸ’­
- we could migrate most of the features to the CROM the important **ones**
	- the rest could be left on the backyard
	- the migrated parts would then be **hidden**

## discussion ðŸ—¯

- [?] what offers are needed on the product
	- not clear, will be discussed tomorrow
- [?]  can we have the `qualify` feature on the [[LUQA]]
	- yes, but...
	- we would need to **simplify** things
	- [?] what happens to other things and other people
- @ [[alexis vassilopoulos]] - we are not  working **retiring backyard**
	- we should do it in `multiple steps`
	- needs to be **aligned** with business
- & [[alexis vassilopoulos]] if we can guarantee profit we can get the time we need
	- ! we can't decommission [[backyard]]
	- in order to do the transition allot of people would need to be involved, **multiple teams**
- $ [[alexis vassilopoulos]] suggestion to develop a shell for general development
- [?] how difficult would it be to have [[backyard]] and [[LUQA]] working `simultaneous`
	- @ [[alexis vassilopoulos]] *I don't see us making the transition by June*
		- some of the things could be done manually - CSV uploads and such
		- we have to see what is `practical`

## <mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">important</mark>
- ! we can't decommission [[backyard]]
- history of the deadline was completely based on the business
	- they need the solution to be ready by `June`
	- the **June** deadline doesn't necessary mean a completely new tool
- we are *almost*  the only `team` that knows about [[backyard]]
- we need to `derisk` the transition to ???

^important

- [x] remind (@[[2024-11-17]])