---
type: meeting
meeting type: pulsar-sync
created: 2025-09-24
scheduled: 2025-09-24T11:30:00
participants:
  - "[[Team Pulsar]]"
  - "[[Ivan Majstorovic]]"
  - "[[vladimir sedlar|me]]"
  - "[[Yoan Haouzi]]"
related:
  - "[[2025-09-09 Pulsar meet on oov 2]]"
  - "[[2025-08-18 Pulsar <-> Pheonix]]"
previous:
agenda:
tags:
  - meet/sync/pulsar
  - meet/oov
---
From: [[2025-09-24-Wed]]
___
## who?

`=this.participants`

## why?
> what caused this to happen, why do we need to have this meeting?

## what?
> meeting agenda

`=this.agenda`

## notes ðŸ—’

- ..

## discussion ðŸ—¨
