---
type: meeting
meeting type: 1on1
created: 2025-11-04
scheduled: 2025-11-04T14:30:00
related:
previous:
agenda:
participants: []
tags:
  - meet
  - meet/sync/pulsar
  - meet/oov
---

From: [[Atlas/Knowledge/daily_notes/2025/11-November/Untitled]]
___
## who?

`=this.participants`

## why?
> what caused this to happen, why do we need to have this meeting?

## what?
> meeting agenda

`=this.agenda`

## notes ðŸ—’

- Pulsar will stop working for the following couple of weeks
	- nothing is sure still
- November 14. is launch day
- [[Organization of Visits - Oov|Oov]]

## discussion ðŸ—¨

## to-do

1. **propagate** new fields
	- requires requirements update [Confluence API](https://avivgroup.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AVIVIM/pages/1879351877/API+contracts+lambda+definitions) | [[Team Pulsar]], [[Team Phoenix]]
2. determine can we send automatic **email** to the **owner** once the visit is `accepted`? | [[Team Phoenix]]
3. test the connection in **production** | [[pulsar]]
