---
type: meeting
meeting type: other
created: 2025-07-28
scheduled: 2025-07-28T11:00:00
related:
previous:
agenda:
participants:
  - "[[backyard team]]"
  - "[[pulsar]]"
tags:
  - meet/oov
  - meet/sync/pulsar
---
From: [[2025-07-28-Mon]]
___
## who?

`=this.participants`

## why?
> what caused this to happen, why do we need to have this meeting?

## what?
> meeting agenda

`=this.agenda`

## notes ğŸ—’

- 

___

## introduction

engeeniring manager of [[pulsar]] [[Kamil Kubacki]].
- 4 years in [[AVIV]]

[[Gabriela Oskroba]]: [[PHP]] and [[react]]., dev engineer

[[Tomasz Swirgon]]: mostly backend dev, into music, ğŸ¸

[[Ivan Majstorovic]]: 2 weeks, 20 years developer, worked on FE. Fullstack, [[Makedonija]]

[[Sebastian Banas]]: mostly backend and devops, JAVA experience. Likes to go outside, â›°

[[Yoan Haouzi]]: 4 years ago, was a PHP engineer, 16 or 17 years ago. In charge of the backyard team.
	also focused on NOVA team. I have a 3 year old daughter.

[[Rafale Lisak]]: been in AVIV for some time, AWS, devops engineer. I have a cat ğŸˆâ€â¬›

[[Zvonimir Lokmer]]: 20 years, mostly PHP and [[Node.js]]. Personal stuff: piano, 3 kids: 2 daughters and a son.

[[Natasa Bozic|Natasa]]: french teacher, 
- was a QA
- business analyst
- has many hobbies
- likes to travel
- husband is Turkish
- likes to learn new languages

## presentation

### New Agency Feature

- API endpoints would need to be added to the backyard
- authentication would need to be covered

