---
type: meeting
meeting type: pulsar-sync
created: 2025-10-28
scheduled: 2025-10-28T14:30:00
related:
previous:
agenda:
participants:
  - "[[Team Pulsar]]"
  - "[[Team Phoenix]]"
tags:
  - meet
  - meet/sync/pulsar
  - meet/oov
project: ""
---

From: [[2025-10-28-Tue]]
___
## who?

`=this.participants`

## why?
> what caused this to happen, why do we need to have this meeting?

## what?
> meeting agenda

`=this.agenda`

## notes ðŸ—’
- I didn't work yesterday and I'm not feeling that well
- [[Organization of Visits - Oov|Oov]]

## discussion ðŸ—¨

- [ ] what are the plans for the presentation? When would it happen?

### status of FE changes

- deployed to dev
- some things need to still be setup
- Ivan's changes were not included

### status of the entire project

- current status
- following steps
- anything that we missed?
- ..

### next steps

- presentation video tomorrow
- we need to deploy today
- ..
