---
type: meeting
meeting type: pulsar-sync
created: 2025-10-14
scheduled: 2025-10-14T14:30:00
related:
previous:
agenda:
participants:
  - "[[Ivan Majstorovic]]"
  - "[[Yoan]]"
  - "[[vladimir sedlar|me]]"
  - "[[Team Pulsar]]"
tags:
  - meet
  - meet/sync/pulsar
  - meet/oov
---
From: [[2025-10-14-Tue]]
___
## who?

`=this.participants`

## why?
> what caused this to happen, why do we need to have this meeting?

## what?
> meeting agenda

current status updates.

## notes ðŸ—’

- Ivan's linux is down
- ..

## discussion ðŸ—¨

1. another presentation: yes
2. final changes: **done** âœ… deploying to [[phoenix environment]]
3. security should be ok
