---
author:
  - "[[Michel Foucault]]"
source: https://gns.wisc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2024/04/Foucault_Lives-of-Infamous-Men_1978.pdf
tags:
  - 📚Book
---

**This is not a book of history.** 

The selection found here was guided by nothing more substantial than my taste, my pleasure, an emotion, laughter, surprise, a **certain dread**, or some other feeling whose intensity I might have trouble justifying, now that the first moment of discovery has passed. 
It's an anthology of existences. Lives of a few lines or a few pages, nameless misfortunes and adventures gathered into a handful of words.

Brief lives, encountered by chance in books and documents. Exempla, but unlike those collected by the sages in the course of their reading, they are examples that convey not so much lessons to ponder as brief effects whose force fades almost at once. The term "news" would fit them rather well, I think, be-cause of the double reference it suggests: to the rapid pace of the narrative and to the reality of the events that are related. For the things said in these texts are so compressed that one isn't sure whether the intensity that sparks through them is due more to the vividness of the words or to the jostling violence of the facts they tell. Singular lives, transformed into strange poems through who knows what twists of fate-that is what I decided to gatherinto a kind of herbarium. 
As I recall, the idea came to me one day when I was reading, atthe Bibliotheque Nationale, a record of internment written at the very beginning of the eighteenth century. If I'm not mistaken, itoccurred to me as I read these two notices:

**Milan**, placed in the hospital of Charenton, 31 August 1707: 
"His madness was always to hide from his family, to lead an obscure life in the country, to have actions at law, to lend usuriously and without security, to lead his feeble mind down unknown paths, and to believe himself capable of the greatest employments."
**Jean Antoine Touzard**, placed in the castle of Bicetre, 21 April 1701: 
"Seditious apostate friar, capable of the greatest crimes, sodomite, atheist if that were possible; this individual is a veritable monster of abomination whom it would be better to stifle than to leave at large."

It would be hard to say exactly what I felt when I read these frag-ments and many others that were similar. No doubt, one of these impressions that are called "physical,'' as if there could be any other kind. I admit that these "short stories," suddenly emerging from two and a half centuries of silence, stirred more fibers within me than what is ordinarily called "literature," without my being able to say even now if I was more moved by the beauty of that Classical style, draped in a few sentences around characters that were plainly wretched, or by the excesses, the blend of dark stubbornness and rascality, of these lives whose disarray and relentless energy one senses beneath the stone-smooth words. 
A long time ago I made use of documents like these for a book. 
If I did so back then, it was doubtless because of the resonance I still experience today when I happen to encounter these lowly lives reduced to ashes in the few sentences that struck them down. **The dream would have been to restore their intensity in an analysis**. 

Lacking the necessary talent, I brooded over the analysis alone. I considered the texts in their dryness, trying to determine their reason for being, what institutions or what political practice they re-ferred to, seeking to understand why it had suddenly been so important in a society like ours to "stifle" (as one stifles a cry, smothers a fire, or strangles an animal) a scandalous monk or a peculiar and inconsequential usurer. I looked for the reason why people were so zealous to prevent the feebleminded from walking down unknown paths. But the first intensities that had motivated me remained excluded. And since there was a good chance that they wouldn't enter into the order of reasons at all, seeing that my discourse was incapable of conveying them in the necessary way, wouldn't it be better to leave them in the very form that had caused me to first feel them? 
Whence the idea of this collection, done more or less as the oc-casion arose. A collection compiled without haste and without a clear purpose. For a long time I thought of presenting it in a sys-tematic order, with a few rudiments of explanation, and in such a way that it would exhibit a minimum of historical significance. I decided against this, for reasons that I will come back to later. I resolved simply to assemble a certain number of texts, for the in-tensity they seem to me to have. I have appended a few preliminary remarks to them, and I have distributed them so as to preserve, as best I could, the effect of each. 
So this book will not answer the purpose of historians, even less than it will others'. A mood-based and purely subjective book? I would say rather-but it may come to the same thing-that it's a rule-and game-based book, the book of a little obsession that found its system. I think that the poem of the oddball usurer or that of the sodomite monk served as a model throughout. It was in order to recapture something like those flash existences, those poem-lives, that I laid down a certain number of simple rules for myself:

The persons included must have actually existed. 
• These existences must have been both obscure and ill-fated. 
• They must have been recounted in a few pages or, better, a few sentences, as brief as possible. 
• These tales must not just constitute strange or pathetic anec-dotes; but, in one way or another (because they were com-plaints, denunciations, orders, or reports), they must have truly formed part of the minuscule history of these existences, oftheir misfortune, their wildness, or their dubious madness. 
• And for us still, the shock of these words must give rise to a certain effect of beauty mixed with dread. 
But I should say a little more about these rules that may appear arbitrary.

==I wanted it always to be a matter of real existences==: that one might be able to give them a place and a date; that behind these names that no longer say anything, behind these quick words which may well have been false, **mendacious**, unjust, exaggerated, there were men who lived and died, with sufferings, meannesses, jealousies,**vociferations**. So I excluded everything in the way of imaginationor literature: none of the dark heroes that the latter have invented appeared as intense to me as these cobblers, these army deserters, these garment-sellers, these scriveners, these vagabond monks, all of them rabid, scandalous, or pitiful. And this was owing, no doubt, to the mere fact that they are known to have lived. I likewise ruled out all the texts that might be memoirs, recollections, tableaus, all those recounting a slice of reality but keeping the distance of ob-servation, of memory, of curiosity, or of amusement. I was deter-mined that these texts always be in a relation or, rather, in the greatest possible number of relations with reality: not only that they refer to it, but they be operative within it; that they form part of the dramaturgy of the real; that they constitute the instrument of a retaliation, the weapon of a hatred, an episode in a battle, the gestic-ulation of a despair or a jealousy, an entreaty or an order. I didn't try to bring together texts that would be more faithful to reality thanothers, that would merit inclusion for their representative value, but, rather, texts that played a part in the reality they speak of-and that, in return, whatever their inaccuracy, their exaggeration, or their hypocrisy, are traversed by it: fragments of discourse trailing the fragments of a reality they are part of. One won't see a collectionof verbal portraits here, but traps, weapons, cries, gestures, atti-tudes, ruses, intrigues for which words were the instruments. Real lives were "enacted" [''jouees"] in these few sentences: by this I don't mean that they were represented but that their liberty, their misfor-tune, often their death, in any case their fate, were actually decided therein, at least in part. These discourses really cTossed lives; exis-tences were actually risked and lost in these words. 
Another requirement of mine was that these personages them-selves be obscure; that nothing would have prepared them for any notoriety; that they would not have been endowed with any of the established and recognized nobilities-those of birth, f0rtune, saint-liness, heroism, or genius; that they would have belonged to those

billions of existences destined to pass away without a trace; that in their misfortunes, their passions, in those loves and hatreds there would be something gray and ordinary in comparison with what is usually deemed worthy of being recounted; that, nevertheless, they be propelled by a violence, an energy, an excess expressed in the malice, vileness, baseness, obstinacy, or ill-fortune this gave them in the eyes of their fellows-and in proportion to its very medioc-rity, a sort of appalling or pitiful grandeur. I had gone in search ofthese sorts of particles endowed with an energy all the greater for their being small and difficult to discern. 
But in order for some part of them to reach us, a beam of light had to illuminate them, for a moment at least. A light coming from elsewhere. ==What snatched them from the darkness in which they could, perhaps should, have remained was the encounter with power==; without that collision, it's very unlikely that any word would be there to recall their fleeting trajectory. The power that watched these lives, that pursued them, that lent its attention, if only for a moment, to their complaints and their little racket, and marked them with its claw was what gave rise to the few words about them that remain for us-either because someone decided to appeal to it in order to denounce, complain, solicit, entreat, or because he chose to intervene and in a few words to judge and decide. All those lives destined to pass beneath any discourse and disappear wilhout ever having been told were able to leave traces-brief, incisive, often enigmatic-only at the point of their instantaneous contact with power. 

So that it is doubtless impossible to ever grasp them again in themselves, as they might have been "in a free state"; **they can no longer be separated out from the declamations, the tactical biases, the obligatory lies that power games and power relations presuppose.** 

I will be told: "That's so like you, always with the same inability to cross the line, to pass to the other side, to listen and convey the language that comes from elsewhere or from below; always the same choice, on the side of power, of what it says or causes to be said. Why not go listen to these lives where they speak in their ownvoice?" But, first of all, would anything at all remain of what theywere in their violence or in their singular misfortune had they not, at a given moment, met up with power and provoked its forces? Is it not one of the fundamental traits of our society, afler all, that 
destiny takes the form of a relation with power, of a struggle with or against it? ==Indeed, the most intense point of a life, the point where its energy is concentrated, is where it comes up against power, struggles with it, attempts to use its forces and to evade its traps.== The brief and strident words that went back and forth be-tween power and the most inessential existences doubtless constitute, for the latter, the only monument they have ever been granted: 
it is what gives them, for the passage through time, the bit of brilliance, the brief **Hash** that carries them to us. 
In short, I wanted to assemble a few rudiments for a legend of obscure men, out of the discourses that, in sorrow or in rage, they exchanged with power. 
A "legend" because, as in all legends, there is a certain ambi-guity between the fictional and the real-but it occurs for opposite reasons. Whatever its kernel of reality, the legendary is nothing else, finally, but the sum of what is said about it. It is indifferent to the existence or nonexistence of the persons whose glory it trans-mits. If they existed, the legend covers them with so many won-ders, embellishing them with so many impossibilities, that it's almost as if they had never lived. And if they are purely imaginary, the legend reports so many insistent tales about them that they take on the historical thiclrness of someone who existed. 

In the texts that follow, the existence of these men and women comes down to exactly what was said about them: nothing subsists of what they were or what they did, other than what is found in a few sentences. Here it is rarity and not [[prolixity]] that makes reality equivalent to fiction. Havjng been nothing in history, having played no appreciable role in events or among important people, having left no identifiable trace around them, **they don't have and never will have any existence outside the precarious domicile of these words**. And through those texts which tell about them, they come down to us bearing no more of the markllgs of reality than if they had come from La Legende doree or from an adventure novel.' This purely verbal existence, which makes these forlorn or villainous individuals into quasi-fictional beings, is due to their nearly complete disappearance, and to that luck or mischance which resulted in the survlval, through the peradventure of rediscovered documents, of a scarce few words that speak of them or that are pronounced by them. A dark, but above all, a dry legend. 

reduced to what was said one day and preserved down to our day by improbable encounters. 
That is another trait of this dark legend. It has not been trans-mitted like one that was gilded by some deep necessity, following continuous paths. By nature, it is bereft of any tradition; disconti-nuities, effacement, oblivion, convergences, reappearances: this is the only way it can reach us. Chance carries it from the beginning. 
It first required a combination of circumstances that, contrary to all expectations, focused the attention of power and the outburst of its anger on the most obscure individual, on his mediocre life, on his (after all, rather ordinary) faults: a stroke of misfortune that caused the vigilance of officials or of institutions, aimed no doubt at sup-pressing all disorder, to pick on this person rather than that, this scandalous monk, this beaten woman, this inveterate and furious drunkard, this quarrelsome merchant, and not so many others who were making just as much of a ruckus. And then it had to be just this document, among so many others scattered and lost, which came down to us and be rediscovered and read. So that between these people of no importance and us who have no more impor-tance than they, there is no necessary connection. Nothing made it likely for them to emerge from the shadows, they instead of others, with their lives and their sorrows. We may amuse ourselves, if we wish, by seeing a revenge in this: the chance that enabled these absolutely undistinguished people to emerge from their place amid the dead multitudes, to gesticulate again, to manifest their rage, their aflliction, or their invincible determination to err-perhaps it makes up for the bad luck that brought power's lightning bolt down upon them, in spite of their modesty and anonymity. 

Lives that are as though they hadn't been, that survive only from the clash with a power that wished only to annihilate them or at least to obliterate them, lives that come back to us only through the effect of multiple accidents-these are the infamies that I wanted to assemble here in the form of a few remains. There exists a false infamy, the kind with which those men of terror or scandal, Gilles de Rais, Guillery or Cartouche, Sade and are blessed. Apparently infamous, because of the abominable memories they have left, the misdeeds attributed to them, the respectful honorthey have inspired, they are actually men of glorious legend, even if the reasons for that renown are the opposite of those that con-
stitute or ought to constitute the greatness of men. Their infamy is only a modality of the universal Jama. But the apostate mar, the feeble minds lost on unknown paths, those are infamous in the strict sense: they no longer exist except through the terrible words that were destined to render them forever unworthy of the memoryof men. And chance determined that these words, these words alone, would subsist. The return of these lives to reality occurs inthe very form in which they were driven out of the world. Useless to look for another face for them, or to suspect a different greatness in them; they are no longer anything but that which was meant to crush them-neither more nor less. Such is infamy in the strictsense, the infamy that, being unmixed with ambiguous scandal orunspoken admiration, has nothing to do with any sort of glory.

In comparison with infamy's great collection, which would gatherits traces from everywhere and all times, I'm well aware that the selection here is paltry, narrow, a bit monotonous. It comprises doc-uments that all date approximately from the same hundred years, 1660-1760, and come from the same source: archives of confine-ment, of the police, of petitions to the King, and of lettres de cachet. 
Let us suppose that this may be a first volume and that Lives ofInfamous Men will be to other times and other places. 
I chose this period and this type of texts because of an old fa-miliarity. But if the taste I've had for them for years has not dimin-ished, and if I come back to them now, it's because I suspect they manifest a beginning, or at any rate an imp01tant event, in which political mechanisms and discursive effects intersected. 
These texts from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (es-pecially when compared with the flatness of later administrative and police documents) display a brilliance, reveal a splendor ofphrasing, a vehemence that belies, in our judgment at least, the pettiness of the affair or the rather shameful meanness of intent. The most pitiful lives are described with the imprecations or em-phasis that would seem to suit the most tragic. A comical effect, no doubt: there is something ludicrous in summoning all the power ofwords, and through them the supreme power of heaven and earth, around insignificant disorders or such ordinary woes. "Unable to bear the weight of the most excessive sorrow, the clerk Duschene ventures with a humble and respectful confidence to throw him-

self at the feet of Your Majesty to implore his justice against the cruelest of all women .... What hope must not rise in the breast ofthis unfortunate one who, reduced to the last extremity, today ap-peals to Your Majesty after having exhausted all the ways of gen-tleness, remonstrance, and consideration to bring back to her duty a wife who lacks all sentiment of religion, honor, probity, and even humanity? Such is, Sire, the state of this poor wretch who dares to voice his plaintive appeal to the ears of Your Majesty." Or that aban-doned wetnurse who asks for the arrest of her husband on behalfof her four children ''who may have nothing to expect from theirfather but a terrible example of the effects of disorder. Your justice, my Lord, will surely spare them such a degrading lesson, will pre-vent opprobrium and infamy for me and my family, by rendering incapable of doing any injury to society a bad citizen who will notfail to bring it harm." We may laugh at this, but it should be keptin mind that to this rhetoric, grandiloquent only because of the smallness of the things to which it is applied, power responds interms that appear no less excessive-with the difference that its words convey the fulguration of its decisions-and their solemnitymay be warranted, if not by the importance of what they punish, then by the harshness of the penalty they impose. If some caster ofhoroscopes is locked up, this is because "there are few crimes she has not committed, and none of which she is not capable. So there is as much charity as justice in immediately ridding the public ofso dangerous a woman, who has robbed it, duped it, and scandal-ized it with impunity for so many years." And about a young addle-brain, a bad son and a ne'er-do-well: "He is a monster of libertinageand impiety .... Practices all the vices: knavish, disobedient, im-petuous, violent, capable of deliberate attacks on the life of his ownfather ... always in the company of the worst prostitutes. Nothingthat is said about his knaveries and profligacies makes any im-pression on his heart; he responds only with a scoundrel's smilethat communicates his callousness and gives no reason to think heis anything short of incurable." Wilh the least peccadillo, one is always in the abominable, or at least in the discourse of invectiveand execration. These loose women and these unruly children do not pale next to Nero or Rodogune. The discourse of power in theClassical age, like the discourses addressed to it, produces mon-