GNU Make - Overview of \@code{make}

Go to the [next](make_2.md) section.

\@shorttitlepage GNU Make Copyright (C) 1988, \'89, \'90, \'91, \'92,
\'93, \'94 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Published by the Free Software Foundation\
675 Massachusetts Avenue,\
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA\
Printed copies are available for \$20 each.\
ISBN 1-882114-50-7\

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
approved by the Free Software Foundation.

Cover art by Etienne Suvasa.

# [Overview of `make`](make_toc.md#SEC1){#SEC1}

The `make` utility automatically determines which pieces of a large
program need to be recompiled, and issues commands to recompile them.
This manual describes GNU `make`, which was implemented by Richard
Stallman and Roland McGrath. GNU `make` conforms to section 6.2 of IEEE
Standard 1003.2-1992 (POSIX.2). []{#IDX2} []{#IDX3} []{#IDX1}

Our examples show C programs, since they are most common, but you can
use `make` with any programming language whose compiler can be run with
a shell command. Indeed, `make` is not limited to programs. You can use
it to describe any task where some files must be updated automatically
from others whenever the others change.

To prepare to use `make`, you must write a file called the
[makefile]{.dfn} that describes the relationships among files in your
program and provides commands for updating each file. In a program,
typically, the executable file is updated from object files, which are
in turn made by compiling source files.

Once a suitable makefile exists, each time you change some source files,
this simple shell command:

    make

suffices to perform all necessary recompilations. The `make` program
uses the makefile data base and the last-modification times of the files
to decide which of the files need to be updated. For each of those
files, it issues the commands recorded in the data base.

You can provide command line arguments to `make` to control which files
should be recompiled, or how. See section [How to Run
`make`](make_9.md#SEC78)}.

## [How to Read This Manual](make_toc.md#SEC2){#SEC2}

If you are new to `make`, or are looking for a general introduction,
read the first few sections of each chapter, skipping the later
sections. In each chapter, the first few sections contain introductory
or general information and the later sections contain specialized or
technical information. The exception is section [An Introduction to
Makefiles](make_2.md#SEC4), all of which is introductory.

If you are familiar with other `make` programs, see section [Features of
GNU `make`](make_12.md#SEC107)}, which lists the enhancements GNU
`make` has, and section [Incompatibilities and Missing
Features](make_13.md#SEC108), which explains the few things GNU `make`
lacks that others have.

For a quick summary, see section [Summary of
Options](make_9.md#SEC85), section [Quick
Reference](make_15.md#SEC115), and section [Special Built-in Target
Names](make_4.md#SEC34).

[]{#IDX4} []{#IDX5} []{#IDX6}

## [Problems and Bugs](make_toc.md#SEC3){#SEC3}

If you have problems with GNU `make` or think you\'ve found a bug,
please report it to the developers; we cannot promise to do anything but
we might well want to fix it.

Before reporting a bug, make sure you\'ve actually found a real bug.
Carefully reread the documentation and see if it really says you can do
what you\'re trying to do. If it\'s not clear whether you should be able
to do something or not, report that too; it\'s a bug in the
documentation!

Before reporting a bug or trying to fix it yourself, try to isolate it
to the smallest possible makefile that reproduces the problem. Then send
us the makefile and the exact results `make` gave you. Also say what you
expected to occur; this will help us decide whether the problem was
really in the documentation.

Once you\'ve got a precise problem, please send electronic mail either
through the Internet or via UUCP:

    Internet address:
        bug-gnu-utils@prep.ai.mit.edu

    UUCP path:
        mit-eddie!prep.ai.mit.edu!bug-gnu-utils

Please include the version number of `make` you are using. You can get
this information with the command `` `make --version' ``{.sample}. Be
sure also to include the type of machine and operating system you are
using. If possible, include the contents of the file `` `config.h' ``
that is generated by the configuration process.

Non-bug suggestions are always welcome as well. If you have questions
about things that are unclear in the documentation or are just obscure
features, send a message to the bug reporting address. We cannot
guarantee you\'ll get help with your problem, but many seasoned `make`
users read the mailing list and they will probably try to help you out.
The maintainers sometimes answer such questions as well, when time
permits.

Go to the [next](make_2.md) section.
