---
type: meeting
meeting type: 1on1
created: 2025-06-19
scheduled: 2025-06-19T11:30:00
related:
previous: "[[1on1 4th]]"
agenda: regular 1 on 1
participants:
  - "[[Yoan Haouzi]]"
  - "[[vladimir sedlar]]"
tags:
  - meet
  - meet/1on1
---
## who?

`=this.participants`
## why?
> what caused this to happen, why do we need to have this meeting?

## what?
> meeting agenda

`=this.agenda`

## ðŸ—’ notes

- new people are coming -> late **July**
- [[Yoan Haouzi]]: meeting with [[Oxygen team]] today
- [?] QSL?
	- [ ] [[Yoan Haouzi]]: it's ok now
- [?] ..

