---
type: meeting
meeting type: 1on1
created: 2025-07-02
scheduled: 2025-07-02T14:45:00
previous: "[[1 on 1 - 2025-06-26]]"
agenda: regular 1 on 1
related:
participants:
  - "[[Yoan Haouzi]]"
  - "[[vladimir sedlar]]"
tags:
  - meet
  - meet/1on1/Yoan
---
## who?

`=this.participants`
## why?
> what caused this to happen, why do we need to have this meeting?

## what?
> meeting agenda

`=this.agenda`

## notes ðŸ—’

- [[backyard]] is now a **priority**
- we should run migrations on [[Media API]] `ASAP` to avoid issues on dev
- [[Transac Zones update ticket]]