---
type: meeting
meeting type: backyard-daily
created: 2025-07-30
scheduled: 2025-07-30T11:45:00
related:
previous:
agenda:
participants:
  - "[[Yoan Haouzi]]"
  - "[[vladimir sedlar]]"
  - "[[Natasa Bozic|Natasa]]"
  - "[[Zvonimir Lokmer]]"
  - "[[Ivan Majstorovic]]"
tags:
  - meet
  - meet/backyard-daily
---
From: [[2025-07-30-Wed]]
___
## who?

`=this.participants`

## why?
> what caused this to happen, why do we need to have this meeting?

## what?
> meeting agenda

`=this.agenda`

## notes ðŸ—’

- ..

## topics to disucss

1. [x] weird messages on [[ma_techs]] channel

2. [x] **ephemeral** env

3. [x] `master` and `dev` branch 

4. [x] what to do about existing builds that we don't have messages from? where is the artifact

5. [ ] what should we do with serge tokens?

