---
type: meeting
meeting type: pulsar-sync
created: 2025-08-18
scheduled: 2025-08-18T13:15:00
related:
previous:
agenda:
participants: []
tags:
  - meet/oov
  - meet/sync/pulsar
---
From: [[extranet]]
___
## who?

`=this.participants`

## why?
> what caused this to happen, why do we need to have this meeting?

## what?
> meeting agenda

`=this.agenda`

## notes ðŸ—’


- we will be sending the confirmation mails.


## discussion ðŸ—¨

1. ? `how` do we inform Oov about new evaluations?
2. 
3. have you done any work on adding API routes on BY?: [[oauth]]
	- @ [[Gabriela Oskroba]]:  from AWS->GCP: `inprogress`, [[kong gateway]]
		- AWS->GCP: `inprogress`
		- GCP->AWS: `inprogress`: roles, etc.
