---
type: meeting
meeting type: backyard-daily
created: 2025-08-20
scheduled: 2025-08-21T11:45:00
related:
previous:
agenda:
participants:
  - "[[Team Phoenix]]"
tags:
  - meet
  - meet/backyard-daily
---
From: [[2025-08-20 backyard daily]]
___
## who?

`=this.participants`

## why?
> what caused this to happen, why do we need to have this meeting?

## what?
> meeting agenda

`=this.agenda`

## notes ðŸ—’

- & we will have a regular **Sprint** meeting every other Friday at 3Pm

## discussion ðŸ—¨

- [x] current status on [[Transac Zones update ticket]]
- [x] serge not working

- [x] migration?
	- [[Yoan Haouzi]]: we will communicate more broadly our efforts
		- create new documents and POC's

- [x] Sprints? when do they start?
- [x] what's the plan for next week?
